A number of years ago it happened to the writer of this book to live in
Venice. He accordingly read, as every good English-speaking Venetian
does, Mr. Howells’s “Venetian Life.” And after the first heat of his
admiration he ingenuously said to himself “I know Constantinople
quite as well as Mr. Howells knew Venice. Why shouldn’t I write a
‘Constantinople Life’” He neglected to consider the fact that dozens
of other people knew Venice even better than Mr. Howells, perhaps, but
could never have written “Venetian Life.” Nevertheless, he took himself
and his project seriously. He went back, in the course of time, to
Constantinople, with no other intent than to produce his imitation of
Mr. Howells. And the reader will doubtless smile at the remoteness of
resemblance between that perfect little book and this big one. Aside, however, from the primary difference between two pens,
circumstances further intervened to deflect this book from its original
aspiration. As the writer made acquaintance with his predecessors in
the field, he was struck by the fact that Constantinople, in comparison
with Venice and I know not how many other cities, and particularly that
Turkish Constantinople, has been wonderfully little “exploited”—at least
in our generation and by users of our language. He therefore turned much
of his attention to its commoner aspects—which Mr. Howells in Venice
felt, very happily, under no obligation to do. Then the present writer
found himself more and more irritated by the patronising or contemptuous
tone of the West toward the East, and he made it rather a point—since
in art one may choose a point of view—to dwell on the picturesque and
admirable side of Constantinople. And soon after his return there took
place the revolution of 1908, whose various consequences have attracted
so much of international notice during the last five years. It was but
natural that events so moving should find some reflection in the pages
of an avowed impressionist. Incidentally, however, it has come about
that the Constantinople of this book is a Constantinople in transition.
The first chapter to be written was the one called “A Turkish Village.”
Since it was originally put on paper, a few weeks before the revolution,
the village it describes has been so ravaged by a well-meaning but
unilluminated desire of “progress” that I now find it impossible to
bring the chapter up to date without rewriting it in a very different
key. I therefore leave it practically untouched, as a record of the
old Constantinople of which I happened to see the last. And as years
go by much of the rest of the book can only have a similar documentary
reference.At the same time I have tried to catch an atmosphere of Constantinople
that change does not affect and to point out certain things of permanent
interest—as in the chapters on mosque yards, gardens, and fountains, as
well as in numerous references to the old Turkish house. Being neither
a Byzantinist nor an Orientalist, and, withal, no expert in questions
of art, I realise that the true expert will find much to take exception
to. While in matters of fact I have tried to be as accurate as possible,
I have mainly followed the not infallible Von Hammer, and most of my
Turkish translations are borrowed from him or otherwise acquired at
second hand. Moreover, I have unexpectedly been obliged to correct my
proofs in another country, far from books and from the friends who
might have helped to save my face before the critic. I shall welcome
his attacks, however, if a little more interest be thereby awakened in
a place and a people of which the outside world entertains the vaguest
ideas. In this book, as in the list of books at its end, I have attempted
to do no more than to suggest. Of the list in question I am the first
to acknowledge that it is in no proper sense a bibliography. I hardly
need say that it does not begin to be complete. If it did it would fill
more pages than the volume it belongs to. It contains almost no original
sources and it gives none of the detailed and classified information
which a bibliography should. It is merely what I call it, a list of
books, of more popular interest, in the languages more commonly read
by Anglo-Saxons, relating to the two great periods of Constantinople
and various phases of the history and art of each, together with a few
better-known works of general literature.